Pretoria - South African Airways (SAA) has warned the public about the re-emergence of a recruitment scam inviting young people to apply for a cabin crew training programme. “This appears to be yet another attempt by criminals to prey on unsuspecting members of the public.  There is neither recruitment nor training programmes for cabin crew positions at SAA at the moment,” said SAA spokesperson Tlali Tlali. The national carrier urged the public to exercise caution and take additional measures to satisfy themselves about the authenticity of vacancies before responding to invitations to submit applications for possible employment. “The scam seems to be targeted at young people of school-leaving age, notably those who may be finishing their matric and are on the lookout for employment opportunities. SAA has placed a moratorium on employing additional personnel. This is part of the airline’s efforts to manage its costs. Even if recruitment were to take place, the procedures we follow are different from those set out in this misleading scam,” said Tlali. The national carrier said the invitation to apply, which has been circulated on various platforms and channels including social media, bears the signs of a scam. “SAA will never insist that applications must be sent through personal emails and the airline does not use @mailbox.co.za domain for email communication purposes. In addition, we do not receive applications/CVs by email from the applicants,” Tlali said. SAA reminded the public that it uses an online recruitment system that requires applicants to register first. The process enables applicants to upload their CVs and other required supporting documents. Registration can be made through SAA’s website www.flysaa.com. “No registration or application fee is applicable when applying for any of our vacancies. Those who have already submitted their personal information to the bogus site, we recommend that they report the matter to the local police without delay,” said Tlali. The airline’s communication platforms are regularly updated and carry all official company information and position statements. Tlali said none of the official platforms reflect the cabin crew recruitment drive with training commencing in December 2016. The national carrier’s official channels of communication are: General Enquiries: +27 11 978-1000 Website: www.flysaa.com Facebook: www.facebook.com/flysaa Twitter: Twitter.com./flysaa. – SAnews.gov.za