Pretoria - An innovative technology introduced in the Eastern Cape has improved access to quality sanitation while saving water. The Department of Science and Technology has unveiled an off-grid sanitation technology solution called the ‘low pour flush toilet system’, which is already benefiting over 120 households in Ndakana village under Amathole District Municipality. The system is low maintenance and uses only two litres of water for one flush. The initiative, which is a partnership between the department, Water Research Commission (WRC) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, is aimed at demonstrating innovative sanitation technologies in rural areas in South Africa. The toilet system was designed to have a look and feel similar to a full flush toilet, but enables greater flushing efficiencies and robustness. Speaking at the system official launch on Saturday, Science and Technology Deputy Director-General for Socio-Economic Innovation Partnerships, Imraan Patel, said the system represents a significant step up the sanitation ladder from ventilated improved pit (VIP) latrines, which were associated with poor user experiences. "What started as a pilot study with 20 household toilets has now grown with over 600 of these innovative sanitation systems implemented countrywide," Patel said. Patel said while most South Africans aspire to have a flush toilet, it was technically challenging to deliver this sanitation technology to all unserved communities. "The cost of constructing such infrastructure is high and there are limited resources, including valuable drinking water to flush down the pan. Through innovative approaches, we are able to simultaneously achieve our national development targets by providing communities with a technology that matches their aspirations, while being economically and resource efficient," said Patel. WRC Executive Manager Dr Jay Bhagwan said the low flush toilet addresses the aspirations of many South Africans for a flush toilet, while overcoming the logistical challenges involved with standard sewerage and working within the limits of the country’s water resources. "The pilot testing indicated high-user acceptance, significant water saving compared to full flush toilets and less trash disposal. This new wave of innovators investigating alternative sanitation methods brings renewed attention to an often neglected service," said Bhagwan. Executive Mayor of Amathole District Municipality, Nomfusi Winnie Nxawe welcomed the initiative, saying it will improve the lives of the people in the area. "We are grateful that we get to put to test technology and ways in which it can be used to make the lives of our people better. As a drought-stricken district, including Amahlathi, all the technology being provided by the department will undoubtedly assist us in providing services for our people amidst the challenges we face in water provision." Corrective Action Requests Report System Meanwhile, the department launched another new system to help municipalities improve their turnaround times when attending to service delivery complaints. The Corrective Action Requests Report System (CARRS) is a web-based technology to improve the efficient management of water leaks designed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). CARRS is currently being piloted in eight district municipalities around the country, including Amathole, Capricorn and Vhembe in Limpopo, Ehlanzeni in Mpumalanga, iLembe in KwaZulu-Natal, and Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati, Ngaka Modiri Molema and Bojanala Platinum in the North West. The launch of the two projects comes a few days before World Toilet Day, observed on 19 November. The UN estimates that over 200 million people in the developing world still do not have access to safe drinking water and 2.5 billion cannot access proper sanitation. A large percentage of these are in Africa. The theme for World Toilet Day 2016 is ‘Toilets and Jobs’, focusing on how sanitation or the lack of it, can impact peoples’ livelihoods. – SAnews.gov.za