Pretoria – Justice and Correctional Services Minister Michael Masutha has described the Limpopo High Court as a necessary development in increasing access to legal services and justice. The Minister officially opened the high court, which is situated in Polokwane, on Tuesday. The opening of the court means people in Limpopo no longer have to travel to Gauteng to access legal services. “The people of Limpopo have for decades needed to travel to Gauteng to access justice and all services that are obtained from a high court. Now they have their own high court. “Access to justice is a fundamental democratic right underlying other human rights entrenched in the Bill of Rights.  These rights will be meaningless without enforcement mechanisms. “Like the rest of South Africa, this beautiful province is still beset with a deep legacy of social inequality, poverty and poor access to justice,” Minister Masutha said. The Limpopo High Court was built at a cost of R1 billion. It started operating in January this year. Since it opened its doors, the court has taken over 51 criminal trials and 43 appeals files from the Gauteng Division of the High Court. Already six cases were placed on the roll from the date the court started functioning and the first murder trial was finalised on 28 January 2016. Limpopo is the eighth province to have a seat of a High Court. The old Thohoyandou High Court has now become the local seat of the Limpopo Division of the High Court, and its area of jurisdiction extends beyond the old Venda territory. “Today we bury that past and affirm the future in which an estimated six million people in Limpopo no longer have to endure the inconvenience and cost of commuting to Pretoria for High Court services. The Superior Courts Act also enables the rationalisation of the High Courts in the former homelands,” Minister Masutha said. The Minister said government will spare no effort in ensuring that all people in the country enjoy equal access to justice. – SAnews.gov.za