Cape Town – President Jacob Zuma says the Constitution empowers him to appoint and remove Ministers without having to consult anyone. The President said this when he fielded oral questions in the National Assembly on Thursday. Democratic Alliance (DA) Parliamentary caucus leader Mmusi Maimane had asked the President whether he consulted any person before the appointment of Minister David van Rooyen as Minister of Finance on 9 December 2015, before withdrawing his appointment three days later. “The appointment and removal of Cabinet Members is dealt with in terms of Section 91(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996. “Section 91(2) of the Constitution provides that ‘The President appoints the Deputy President, and Ministers, assigns their powers and functions and may dismiss them’. Section 93 (1) of the Constitution states that ‘The President may appoint any number of Deputy Ministers from among the members of the National Assembly to assist the members of the Cabinet and may dismiss them’. “The Constitution does not require me to consult anyone before I appoint or remove a Minister or Deputy Minister,” he said. Following the appointment of Minister Van Rooyen, the President, after considering representations from members of the society, including the business sector, decided to replace him with Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Pravin Gordhan. Minister Van Rooyen was then moved to head the Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Department. President clarifies Deputy Minister Jonas's appointment In asking supplementary questions, Members of Parliament asked the President to respond to allegations that some Ministers have in recent times been approached and offered jobs by the Gupta family. The President said as the Head of Government, he makes all appointments of Ministers and Deputy Ministers. “I appointed [Deputy Minister] Jonas as a Deputy Minister. That is what I offered Jonas. I never offered Jonas [a position as a] Minister. “If Jonas says he was offered by the Gupta family, I think you will be well placed to ask the Gupta family or [Deputy Minister] Jonas. I am in charge of government. I appoint in terms of the Constitution.” The President said no Minister in the Cabinet was ever appointed by the Gupta family. He said he has removed or redeployed Ministers in the past before and that there were always reasons behind the decisions. “There are always reasons that lead to… a Minister [having] to be shifted or redeployed… This arises out of what government is doing and what the thinking and decisions of government are. The necessary processes were undertaken within the Constitution and within the law.” – SAnews.gov.za