Pretoria – The Department of Home Affairs has partnered with the European Union and the UN Office on Drugs and Crime to address trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants in South Africa. “Human trafficking and smuggling of migrants too often leads to injury and death in transit, exploitation, sexual abuse, forced marriage and even slavery. “These are amongst the most heinous and despicable of crimes, with devastating impact on victims, which blight our collective consciences as humanity,” said Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba at the launch of the “Global Action to prevent and address Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants” or GLO.ACT. Spearheaded by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the project aims to strengthen the criminal justice response to trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants in 13 strategically selected countries across the globe. In addition to providing assistance to governmental authorities, the project will also benefit civil society organizations as well as victims of trafficking and smuggled migrants directly. The Minister said South Africa is also in the process of developing legislation on the smuggling of migrants. Offences of Smuggling of Migrants are currently prosecuted under the Immigration Act and the Prevention of Organized Crime Act (POCA), which to a great extent cover criminal acts outlined by the Smuggling of Migrants Protocol and the Organised Crime Convention. Research has also been undertaken to identify best international practice and adapt this to the situation in South Africa, which has a Constitution founded on the principle of self-determination and the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. “Interim measures include improved training for immigration and law enforcement officers based on these principles, that is, improving security and service delivery at ports of entry and improving the rate and quality of the adjudication on cases of asylum seekers. “This will assist and strengthen the development of the envisaged legislation,” said Minister Gigaba. He said there were a number of steps that can be taken to prevent, prosecute and eventually eradicate human trafficking. “Firstly, we need better data and research to better understand the scale of the problem and local/regional dynamics…Secondly, we must orient, train and capacitate law enforcement agencies and personnel to respond more effectively to human trafficking. “ … we must increase intelligence sharing and the coordination of efforts among relevant agencies … we must partner with NGOs and civil society groups to identify incidents of trafficking and smuggling, assist victims and raise societal awareness. “Finally, we must strengthen international partnerships with other countries in the region and beyond,” said the Minister. Minister Gigaba said government stands resolute that human trafficking is an evil, an abomination and an egregious violation of a person’s human rights. – SAnews.gov.za