Sedibeng – At the age of 66, Ratsatsi Margaret Pontsho, from Midvaal, never thought she would have her own home. On Friday, an emotional Pontsho was among the beneficiaries who received house keys from Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu. “I never thought I would ever have a place called my own, but today I will be sleeping on a comfortable bed. I don’t have to go outside in the middle of the night when I want to relieve myself. Having electricity and running water is a bonus. “I know people have been waiting for a long time, but I know their turn is coming. I’m proof that government cares,” said an elated Pontsho, resting on her couch inside her new home. Minister Sisulu handed over the houses to beneficiaries of Savanna City Housing Project, one of the department’s integrated projects, which straddles at least three municipalities, Sedibeng District, Midvaal and Johannesburg Municipalities. Pontsho said her life is far better than it was. “I’m now a respected house owner, all because of our new democratic government.” Before moving to the new house, Pontsho had been staying at Jonker plot since 1973, where she was taking care of her three grandchildren and two great grandchildren. The new house, which is fully furnished, has basic electrical appliances, electricity, flushing toilet and running water. The R24 billion project is part of government’s efforts to provide decent housing for needy people and restore people’s dignity by ensuring that they enjoy the right to adequate and quality shelter. Savanna City is expected to yield over 18 000 units, while providing decent shelter to over 70 000 people. Savanna City provides mixed housing typologies such as bonded houses, rental stock and fully subsidized houses affectionately known as BNG or RDP houses. For 2016/2017 financial year, government has allocated R100 million for bulk infrastructure in Savanna City. Minister Sisulu said 500 houses have been completed and the department would be handing over the title deeds to the owners. Prioritising vulnerable groups The Minister has urged qualifying people, who are on the waiting list for houses to be patient as the department is currently prioritising the vulnerable groups. “Your turn is coming, we are prioritising the elderly, disabled people and child headed households. Those are the most vulnerable in our society. “By this time next year, 2000 more houses would be finished and by Christmas the majority of you would have moved in your houses,” Minister Sisulu assured the community. The Minister also thanked the Banking Association for partnering with government in ensuring that people have decent houses and urged the beneficiaries not to sell or rent out their houses. “If you sell your house, there are consequences. We also want you to look after your houses and keep them clean because it can’t happen that we come from Cape Town to clean your yards.” Mayor of Midvaal Local Municipality, Bongani Baloyi, said the municipality is ready to work with the provincial and national government to ensure that it delivers the services to the people. “Our future is better than yesterday and those who are still on waiting list, their turn is definitely coming,” said Baloyi. Gauteng is currently engaged in planning and implementing at least six big city developments. The developments are Boiketlong in the Southern Corridor, Vaal River City in the Southern Corridor, Fort West in the Northern Corridor, Leeuwpoort in the Eastern Corridor, Lanseria City in the Central Corridor, Alex City in the Central Corridor, Syferfontein City in the Western Corridor and Savannah City in the Southern Corridor. The province plans to deliver 50 000 housing units by the end of this financial year. – SAnews.gov.za