Pretoria - The Gauteng Department of Education has advised all parents that the online admissions process for Grade 1 and 8 learners will commence at 8am on Tuesday. The applications period for a spot at a government school will close at midnight on1 June 2016. All parents are advised to apply online by logging on www.gdeadmissions.gov.za. The department released a step-by-step guide to the registration process. Registration process Login process 5. Use the created login credentials to log-in to access the main application page 6. On this page a parent can: - Parents who created login credentials in 2015 must use the same credentials - Parents who have forgotten their login credentials click the reset password to create new login credentials - view or edit details by clicking on the “ My Details” link - register learner information by clicking on the “ Register Learner “ link (the application cannot be made unless a learner is registered) - apply by clicking the link “Apply For 2017” Application process 7. General application - select a learner - select the grade applying for in 2017 - select the address (home or work) for the system to pop-up the three closest schools to the address - click “Apply” to submit your application - An automated SMS will be sent to the parent’s cell phone number to confirm the submission of the online application 8. Application for a learner with a sibling at a school 9. Application to a school of choice - select a learner - select the grade applying for in 2017 - tick the checkbox to select the sibling’s school - if the sibling’s school is not found click the “Add Sibling Details” to register sibling information first, then select the sibling’s school - select the address (home or work) for the system to pop-up the two closest schools to the address - click “ Apply” to submit your application - An automated SMS  will be sent to the parent’s cell phone number to confirm the submission of the online application - select a learner - select the grade applying for in 2017 - select “school of choice” option on the address dropdown  to select a school - select an a address (home or work) on the second address dropdown  for the system to pop-up the two closest schools to the address - click “Apply” to submit your application - An automated SMS will be sent to the parent’s cell phone number to confirm the submission of the online application The department said the placement of learners will commence from 24 June until 25 July 2016. During this period, schools will process learner placement online. Parents will receive an automated SMS indicating offer of placement. Letters will also be sent to parents informing them of successful and unsuccessful applications. Then parents will be given a period of 7 days to accept or reject placement offers. - SAnews.gov.za 