Johannesburg - Social cohesion advocates say it is time to move beyond just condemning racism and hate speech that deters South Africa from being a united rainbow nation. They say it is time to mobilise society and root out racism, starting from a grassroots level. On Thursday, Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa sat in a daylong meeting with social cohesion advocates in Johannesburg to discuss social cohesion, nation building and eradicating racism in the country. The advocates represented various sectors of society, including leaders from the religious sector, business, creative arts, youth and others. Judge Yvonne Mokgoro took the meeting through 11 recommendations of the Social Cohesion Advocates Five-Year Plan, which include mobilising society in its entirety towards nation building, promoting and preserving all indigenous cultures and knowledge, continuing to fight any form of discrimination, respecting human dignity and equality, and expanding national heritage. She said it was important to include the participation of all in society if South Africa wants to realise a cohesive society. “We have to ensure that social cohesion and nation building underpins all national, provincial and local government strategic priorities,” said Mokgoro. Singer and social activist Simphiwe Dana was among the advocates who attended the meeting. She told SAnews that for the past 21 years, South Africans were not really responding to racist remarks or actions as much as they seem to be doing now. She said people are tired of racism and are no longer afraid to confront those who commit acts of racism. She said she was pleased to see how young South Africans are speaking out and marching against issues that affect them. Dana called on the advocates and social activists to facilitate the process that will see South Africa moving forward in the right direction. She said if South Africa is going to introduce legislation that criminalises racism, people first need to understand what racism is. Another advocate Faith Mangope, who is also a TV presenter, said if government and institutions want to target young people, they should speak to them in the language they understand and they should also understand youth culture. “There is a misconception that young people are not interested in issues affecting society or that they are apolitical,” she said. Other advocates said progress is being recorded in addressing racism and building a cohesive society, but there is a need to integrate their programmes with like-minded institutions to maximise the efforts. Others said it was disturbing that most of the time when dialogues are held with communities about social cohesion, they are not inclusive of all races. Minister Mthethwa, in his opening remarks, said building a non-racial society is not an easy task. “It requires a change in mind-sets, a willingness to think, to understand the basic dignity of all people and a commitment to equality and inclusivity in pursuit of a better life for all,” said the Minister. The Minister took note of all recommendations made on the day and advocates were requested to submit more recommendations via email to the office of the Minister. - SAnews.gov.za