Pretoria - President Jacob Zuma has decided on a below inflation increase of 4.4% for political office bearers nationally and provincially for the 2015/16 financial year. The Presidency on Wednesday said the President’s decision was in line with the current economic climate. “The determination for 2016/17 has not yet been made by the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers. The salary of the President is determined by Parliament,” said the Presidency. It said the salaries and allowances of different categories of public office bearers are determined by the President, after taking into account the recommendations of the commission, the affordability of different levels of remuneration of political office bearers, the current principles and level of remuneration in society in general, the provision of uniform norms and standards nationally to address disparities, and inflationary increases. The Presidency said the commission recommended that the salaries of all public office bearers be increased, with effect from 1 April 2015, as follows: • Five percent for Members of the Executive and Deputy Ministers. • Five percent for Members of Parliament. • Five percent Premiers, MECs and Members of the Provincial Legislatures. • Five percent from the position of the Chief Justice to the position of the Judge of the Supreme Court of Appeal. • 5.5 percent from the position of the Judge President of High Court / Labour Court to position of the Judge of the High Court/Labour Court. • 5.5 percent from the position of the Special Grade Chief Magistrate to the position of the Chief Magistrate. • Six percent from the position of the Senior Magistrate to the position of the Magistrate. • 5.5 percent for a position of a King/Queen. • Six percent from the position of the Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders to the position of a Full-time member of the Provincial House of Traditional Leaders. • Eight percent for the position of a Senior Traditional Leader. • R91 000.00 for the Headmen/Headwomen. After considering, among others, the recommendations of the commission and the deteriorating conditions of the economic climate, President Zuma has decided to increase the salaries of all public office bearers as follows: • 4.4 percent for all public office bearers, except Magistrates and certain category of the traditional leaders. • 5.5 percent from the position of the Special Grade Chief Magistrate to the position of the Chief Magistrate. • Six percent from the position of the Senior Magistrate to the position of the Magistrate. • 4.4 percent for a position of a King/Queen. • Six percent from a position of the Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders to a position of a Full-time member of the Provincial House of Traditional Leaders. • Eight percent for a position of a Senior Traditional Leader. • R91 000 for the Headmen/Headwomen. “President Zuma has thanked the Commission for its work,” said the Presidency. - SAnews.gov.za