Pretoria – A survey that measures the quality of life in Gauteng has placed the province’s aerotropolis in the number one spot. Residents taking part in the 2015 Gauteng City Region Observatory Quality of Life (GCRO QoL) survey reported high levels of satisfaction with the quality of life in the airport city. Ekurhuleni has made significant strides in cementing its vision of being Africa’s leading aerotropolis, offering businesses within the city speedy connectivity to their suppliers, customers and enterprise partners both nationally and internationally. The city’s plan to grow its business base is paying off, with the 4th Quality of Life Survey indicating a consistent increase in satisfaction with basic services such as energy and water. The increase is noted from the beginning of the current administration in 2011. The 2015 GCRO QoL revealed that more than 70% of Ekurhuleni residents are generally satisfied with the provision of services in the metro. Over 80% of residents are satisfied with water services, while more that 70% of residents have given the city thumbs up on sanitation services. More than 70% of residents are happy with the provision of energy services. About 80% are content with the provision of waste removal services. Around 49% said they are satisfied with the cost of services in the municipality, while 22% “remained neutral”. About 60% of residents have given the city’s roads a nod, with over 68% being happy with the city’s public health facilities. Ekurhuleni City Manager Khaya Ngema said the survey results show the city is heading in the right direction. He said, however, that more is still required to address the shortcomings. “As we get into the new financial year ... all hands are on deck from our senior managers and staff to deliver to the people of Ekurhuleni the ideal city … expressed in the Integrated Development Plan,” Ngema said. GCRO was commissioned in 2009 to analyse the quality of life of citizens, identify the key areas and groups needing intervention and support, and provide a holistic assessment of life in the Gauteng city region. The Quality of Life Survey is the largest social attitudes survey conducted in Gauteng. – SAnews.gov.za