Pretoria - Communications Minister Faith Muthambi says the late former president Nelson Mandela encouraged the creation of a society where the voiceless would have a voice. “Nelson Mandela encouraged the creation of a society where the voiceless would have a voice, where dialogue takes place even in the most remote places. “He said through community media, we have an obligation to defend, advance and deepen democracy. He further cautioned that despite the successes we have scored in democratising South Africa, it did not mean that anti-democratic forces of counter-revolution no longer exist in our society,” she said. Minister Muthambi was speaking at a Community Newspapers media breakfast in Pretoria, on Thursday morning. She emphasised that State Owned Entities (SOEs) need to increase their use of community media or alternative media in order to communicate their messages. “Since assuming office in government, we have been consistent in our support to community media.” The State Owned Enterprises Communicators Association (SOECA) and the State Owned Enterprises Procurement Forum (SOEPF) is currently negotiating with the SABC to earn 36 slots in order to provide SOEs with a platform to share and provide accurate information about their institutions. “I am also aware that you have created a portal system with your own publications that will enrich and facilitate the flow of information within the SOEs as well as government,” she said. Minister Muthambi said journalists may be at the centre of reputable media environment, but they are not the only ones chronicling the world around them. “This is where the idea of ‘Owned media’ becomes relevant. You should not be apologetic about telling your own stories. State Owned Entities Procurement Forum must become an enabler to achieve that historic mandate. “They must not sit there and create stumbling blocks, claiming this cannot be done and instead they must offer solutions on how it can be done. We need a pro-transformation procurement forum that speaks loud with clear transformation agenda. No excuse,” she said. Minister Muthambi said the relationship between her Ministry and SOECA, SOEPF and Community Newspapers Initiative (CNI) is duly cemented. “You must continue to believe in your vision because a positive thinker sees the invisible, feels the intangible and achieves the impossible,” she said. The Minister further appealed to community newspapers to urge South Africans to honour Madiba by going to vote on 3 August. The South African Local Government Association (Salga) spokesperson Tahir Sema said they took a decision to set aside 30% to advertise on community media. - SAnews.gov.za