Pretoria - Eskom has reminded South Africans of the dangers of illegal electricity connections that can be deadly in some instances. In a statement, Eskom said illegal connections, commonly known as izinyoka, and meter tampering are a significant cause of injuries and fatalities in the country. “An electricity connection is considered illegal when any connection is made to the Eskom network without Eskom’s permission. This can range from connecting to a mini sub-station, or simply connecting a neighbour through your personal meter or electricity board or tampering or bridging your meter,” said the power utility. The utility said while people who live without electricity are of the view that connecting illegally is a viable solution, too often people lose their lives due to this form of electricity theft. “More concerning is that it is often children who are electrocuted and fatally injured when they unwittingly touch carelessly-laid cables left by those who steal electricity. Illegal connections are dangerous for several reasons, the most common of which is the lack of safety features associated with the connections. “When electrical connections are made by untrained persons, the cables often lack protective insulation.” Illegal connections are also not suspended at a safe height above ground. This means that children, animals and adults often touch the unprotected wires and accidentally cause electrocution, which can cause injury or death. An additional risk associated with illegal connections is that illegally-connected wires can also make contact with other items like roofs, gutters and washing lines, and security gates, making these items live and able to conduct electricity and shock people. In order to address these challenges, Eskom established Operation Khanyisa, a partnership campaign that aims to mobilise South Africans to use electricity legally. “We would like to remind all South Africans that, although electricity is an essential part of life, it can be dangerous if not used correctly. It is always advisable to get a qualified electrician to do any electrical connections or repairs. Only authorised Eskom employees and contractors are permitted to work on all Eskom structures,” Eskom said. – SAnews.gov.za